POKEMON DESOLATION - ACCESSIBILITY MODS
=======================================

Everything lives under patch\ - the same layout Reborn and Rejuvenation use -
except ONE file: Data\Mods\AccessibilityLoader.rb. Desolation's engine only
ever loads mods from Data\Mods (that single Dir[] line in ClientData.rb is its
whole mod system), so one bootstrap must stay there; it is what loads
patch\Mods. Delete it and the entire accessibility system goes dead.

  Data\Mods\AccessibilityLoader.rb   the bootstrap - the one file outside patch
  patch\Mods\                        the thirteen mods below, plus any of yours
  patch\lib\                         beacon.dll and phonon.dll (Steam Audio)
  patch\audio\                       beacon.wav, arrive.ogg, tile_sounds\
  patch\biology.dat                  the biology database for the summary

Your original mod is kept as Data\Mods\AccessibilitySpeech.rb.original-backup
(no .rb ending, so the game ignores it). To revert everything: delete
Data\Mods\AccessibilityLoader.rb and the patch\Mods folder, and rename the
backup back to AccessibilitySpeech.rb in Data\Mods.

  AccessibilityBag.rb             the bag: pockets, descriptions, quantities
  AccessibilityBattle.rb          battles: messages, menus, moves, damage
  AccessibilityBeacon.rb          the 3D Steam Audio guidance beacon
  AccessibilityEvents.rb          selection screens built out of map events
  AccessibilityMapFix.rb          one defensive guard on a base-game method
  AccessibilityMenus.rb           every menu, list and screen outside battle
  AccessibilityOptions.rb         the accessibility settings in the Options screen
  AccessibilityPathfind.rb        event scanning, pathfinding and auto-walk
  AccessibilityPathfindNames.rb   real names for the events in that list
  AccessibilityQuests.rb          the quest log, and spoken quest updates
  AccessibilitySpeech.rb          the speech engine (NVDA) and speaker names
  AccessibilitySummary.rb         the Accessible Summary menu entry and K
  AccessibilityWorld.rb           tile sounds


KEYS
----
  F1   Repeat the last thing spoken
  F2   Turn speech on or off
  V    Say the map name, your coordinates, and the surface underfoot
       (map only - silent in battle and during cutscenes)
  Shift+B  Start or stop the 3D beacon guiding you to the selected target
  K        On the party screen or in the PC: the Accessible Summary menu of
           that Pokemon (also the LAST entry of its action menu, after Cancel)
  N        In the bag: read the selected item's description
           In a Pokedex entry: read the species' biology

The pathfinder adds its own keys - H, I, J, K, L, N, O, P and F5, most of them
with a Shift variant. They are listed under PATHFINDING AND AUTO-WALK below,
and they are Reborn's keys unchanged.

These were picked against a full audit of the game's own key bindings, so
nothing was taken away from you. Z stays quicksave, M stays turbo, F6 to F12
stay as they were. F5 is the one overlap, and it is explained below.


SETTINGS
--------
They are in the game's own Options screen, at the end of the list, and the
menus mod reads them out like anything else there:

  Speech               the screen reader output itself (F2 does this too)
  Speaker Names        saying who is talking before their line
  Event Names          working out real names for EV027-style events
  Tile Sounds          footsteps that say what you are walking on
  Tile Sound Volume    0 to 100, on top of the game's own SE volume
  Directional Beacon   whether Shift+B does anything
  Spoken Directions    whether the beacon also says left / right / up / down
  Battle Speech        battle messages, menus, moves and targets
  Spoken Damage        exact damage numbers after every hit

Spoken Directions has three settings rather than on/off, because "say it as
well as the 3D sound" and "say it only when there is no 3D sound" are
different things to want:

  If no 3D sound   (default) speak only when Steam Audio could not start
  Always           speak alongside the 3D beacon
  Never            stay quiet even with no 3D beacon at all

ONE ORDERING TRAP, WORTH KNOWING IF YOU ADD MORE

Data/Mods loads alphabetically, so AccessibilityOptions ("O") loads BEFORE
AccessibilitySpeech ("S"). A setting whose real home is another mod therefore
cannot be applied when the options mod loads - that mod does not exist yet, the
call quietly does nothing, and the speech mod then loads with speech ON no
matter what you had chosen. A stored "off" would never survive a restart.

So the bootstrap applies the settings again after it has loaded everything.
That is what makes them stick. test_load_order checks it, because this was a
real bug found by writing that check.

They are stored in ONE new field on $Settings - a Hash, not six separate
fields - so a Settings.dat saved before this mod existed simply comes back with
nothing there and everything falls through to its default, switched on.

Settings.dat is SEPARATE from your save games. If it ever went bad the game
deletes it and rebuilds (ClientData.rb:44), costing you your options and
nothing else. That is why adding to it is safe in a way that adding to a save
file would not be.

The game's own options screen applies every setting when you leave it but never
writes them to disk, so these save themselves the moment they change.

Adding rows to the option list is the game's OWN idiom - Options.rb:419 pushes
the Unreal Time options on at runtime in exactly this way, guarded against
double-adding, and so is this.


BATTLES
-------
Modelled directly on Reborn 19.5's own Blindstep battle support - the tts
calls in its Battle_Scene, its Battle_Inspect screen, and the community
SpokenDamageAccessibility patch. Desolation ships the same engine with every
one of those speech lines missing, so this mod puts them back from the
outside.

WHAT YOU HEAR

  Battle messages     "Growlithe used Ember!", "It's super effective!" -
                      queued in order, exactly the text on screen
  The command menu    "What will Growlithe do?" then Fight, Bag, Pokemon or
                      Run as you move the cursor
  The fight menu      each move as you land on it: "Ember, Fire type, 24 of
                      25 PP"
  Targeting           the battler you are aiming at, in doubles
  Mega, Ultra, Z      "Mega Evolution activated" when you press X
  Damage              "Growlithe took 24 damage. 27 HP left." after every
                      hit, from any source - moves, recoil, hazards, poison.
                      "...and fainted." when it was fatal
  Choices             Yes/No and move-learning prompts through the ordinary
                      menu reading

KEYS IN BATTLE (while on the command or fight menu)

  K          quick readout of every active Pokemon: level, HP, status
             condition, stat changes - plus your own ability and held item,
             and for the enemy only the moves they have actually REVEALED,
             the same rule Reborn's inspect uses
  Shift+K    field readout: weather, field effect and its remaining turns,
             screens and hazards on both sides, Trick Room
  Q          YOUR side in full: types, HP, status, stat changes, ability,
             item, and every move with exact PP - Reborn's L-button inspect
  W          the ENEMY side in full: types, HP percent, status, stat
             changes, revealed moves - Reborn's R-button inspect
  Z          on the fight menu: the focused move's whole card - category,
             power, accuracy, PP, and its full description

Q and W are the game's own L and R buttons, the same two keys Reborn uses for
its in-battle inspect, so the habit carries straight over.

THE BEACON PAUSES FOR BATTLES. The looping 3D sound stops the moment a fight
starts and starts itself again on your first step afterwards - the target is
kept, so it is a pause, not a cancel.

Yours reads exact HP; the enemy reads a percentage - again Reborn's rule: the
game does not show you enemy HP numbers, so neither does the reader.

Outside battle K belongs to the pathfinder; those keys are dead during a
fight, so the muscle memory carries straight across.

HOW IT DIFFERS FROM REBORN'S, AND WHY

Reborn's battle speech is written INTO its engine - tts calls inside the
Battle_Scene menu loops. A mod cannot edit a loop, so this hooks the points
those loops already call every frame: the menu displays' index setters, the
targeting updater, the frame updater (which is what carries the K keys), the
message pipeline, and the HP reduction itself for damage.

Reborn's full Inspect screen recalculates exact stats (its Battle_Inspect.rb
defines pbCalcAttack and friends against Reborn's field internals). The K
readout reports Desolation's own data instead - stat STAGES rather than
recalculated numbers - which is accurate by construction and cannot drift
from the engine.

Both menu displays embed a command window that AccessibilityMenus would read
generically ("Fight", bare move names). Those windows are marked with the
menus mod's a11y_silent opt-out, so the richer battle announcements are the
only voice - no double-speech.

One deliberate speech choice: battle messages QUEUE (each waits for the last),
because "used Ember", "super effective", "took 24 damage" is a sequence worth
hearing whole; menu movement INTERRUPTS, because scrolling must stay
responsive. Same split Reborn uses. And repeated messages are spoken again
deliberately - "But it failed!" twice is two events, not an echo - which is
why battle speech bypasses the speech mod's repeat-suppression while still
respecting F2 and the Options switches.


THE BAG
-------
The item list spoke already; this covers the rest. Switching pockets with LEFT
and RIGHT announces the pocket name and re-reads the selected item. A
registered key item says "registered" on its row. Sorting a pocket with X says
so. Choosing a quantity - tossing, or moving items at a PC - speaks every
number as you change it. And N reads the selected item's full description, in
the bag and in the PC's item storage both. On a TM or HM, N also says who in
the party CAN learn it, who already knows it, and who cannot - the same
verdicts the sighted player gets as icons.

The one silent thing left is the Y-key item-rearranging mode, which lives
entirely in local variables the mod cannot see. Sorting with X covers the
same need.


THE QUEST LOG
-------------
Opened from the Pokegear as before; the menu and the quest list already spoke.
Now the Main/Side tab announces itself when you flip it with LEFT and RIGHT,
and opening a quest reads the whole page: the quest's name, its state, then
every objective you have reached - finished ones prefixed "Done", unreached
ones NOT read at all, so nothing is spoiled. Long quests read their page
position, and LEFT and RIGHT turn pages.

Quest progress on the map - the sliding "Quest Added / Completed" toast - is
spoken the moment it appears: "Quest added: Restore the Beacon." When the game
suppresses its own popup, the speech stays quiet too.


LEARNING MOVES
--------------
When a Pokemon levels up and wants a fifth move, the "forget which move?"
screen now reads every move the cursor lands on IN FULL: name, type, category,
power, accuracy, remaining PP, and the description - and the move being
learned is prefixed "New move" and carries no PP, because it has none yet. The
same reading covers the summary screen's ordinary move page, in battle and
out of it, so comparing moves is finally a real comparison.


THE ACCESSIBLE SUMMARY
----------------------
Its own screen now, modelled on Reborn's pra-accessible-summary mod, and it
speaks entirely for itself - every row is read directly, on open and on every
arrow press, depending on nothing else.

WHERE TO FIND IT: highlight any Pokemon and press C to open its action menu.
The LAST entry - after Cancel - is "Accessible Summary". It is there on the
party screen, in every PC box menu (Withdraw, Deposit and Move mode), and on
the in-battle switch menu. K on the party screen or in the PC opens the very
same thing directly.

It opens a menu; C picks an entry, B goes back:

  Everything               the full readout in one list: name and species,
                           dex number, kind, types, level, gender, shiny,
                           nature, status, HP, all five stats, happiness,
                           EVs and IVs, ability and its description, held
                           item and its description, every move in full with
                           its description, the Pokedex entry, original
                           trainer, met level, and the biology
  Stats, EVs and IVs       one row per stat: its current total, its IV and
                           its EV - plus the EV total out of 510 and the
                           experience still needed for the next level
  Base stats and abilities the SPECIES: typing, all six base stats with the
                           base stat total, every ability the species can
                           have, and the one this Pokemon actually has
  Moves                    each move with type, category, power, accuracy
                           and exact PP, each followed by its description
  Biology                  the long prose description, sentence by sentence
                           at your own pace
  Export team to text file writes your whole party - Showdown style, with
                           EVs, IVs, natures, items and moves - to a text
                           file in the game folder, for sharing or notes

Inside any list: arrow through the rows, every row is read; C repeats the
row with its position ("Row 4 of 12"); B goes back. Eggs open a plain egg
readout - steps to hatch, nothing spoiled.

The stat order everywhere is Desolation's own (Speed LAST, not third, unlike
standard Essentials - reading the arrays the standard way would silently swap
three stats; a test pins the right order, and the export file re-maps it to
the usual HP/Atk/Def/SpA/SpD/Spe writing order).

BIOLOGY comes from the Reborn accessibility project's pokemon_biology.json -
1,020 species, shipped pre-converted as patch\biology.dat so the game's
stdlib-less Ruby never needs the json library. tools\build_biology.rb
regenerates the .dat from the json. The same text is on N inside a Pokedex
entry.

Reborn's version adds its menu entry by copying the whole party-screen
method, which breaks when the game updates. Here the menu is extended by one
small wrapper instead - the new entry is appended AFTER Cancel so every
index the game checks stays where it was - and it only appears while speech
is on.

The game's own graphics summary also still tries to speak page by page
(LEFT/RIGHT through Info, Trainer Memo, Skills, EV and IV, Moves), and the
move pages read every move in full - but the Accessible Summary above is the
one built to be trusted.


THE POKEDEX
-----------
The species list spoke already - name, seen and caught counts. Opening an
entry reads the species, its kind, and the dex text; moving up and down
between species inside the entry view reads each one. N reads the biology.


TILE SOUNDS - THE LEGEND RPG SYSTEM
-----------------------------------
Sounds live in patch/audio/tile_sounds/<surface>/ - the same folder layout as
the Legend RPG - and each surface folder holds:

  step1.ogg .. step5.ogg   walking variants, picked at random
  land.ogg                 landing after a ledge hop
  fall.ogg                 the drop itself

A random variant is chosen every step and the same one never plays twice in a
row, so walking a corridor never turns into a metronome.

land.ogg and fall.ogg NEVER play while walking. They belong to ledge hops
only, so hearing one always means you just went down a ledge.

Steps are flat - no panning, no pitch by direction. You know which way you are
walking because you are holding the key; the step is there to say what is
under your feet.

HOW A SURFACE IS CHOSEN

Two layers, in this order:

  1. Real terrain wins. Grass, water, ice, sand, bridges, puddles and the rest
     are tagged in the map data, and a tagged tile always sounds like what it
     is, on every map.

  2. Featureless ground takes the character of its map. Most indoor floors,
     paths and cave bottoms share one "neutral" tag, so on their own they
     would all sound the same. The map's NAME decides instead:

       apartments, manors, rooms      hardwood
       Pokemon Centers, hospitals     linoleum
       labs, cafes, marts             tile
       libraries and archives         carpet
       gyms, prisons, arenas          concrete
       caves, depths, tunnels         cave floor
       mountains, rises, peaks        rocks
       forests and groves             leaves
       beaches, islands, dunes        sand
       docks, ships, cruises          deck
       councils, temples, chambers    marble
       towers, bases, factories       metal
       portals and dreamscapes        synthetic
       ruins                          rubble
       rooftops                       roof
       sewers                         sewer
       cities and towns               pavement
       routes and passages            dirt
       anything else                  generic

Of Desolation's 480 maps, 440 now get a fitting surface; the 40 left on
generic are the unnamed ones (???, MAP393, SURGE), where generic is right.

The surfaces are fixed in the mod and there is no table to edit, so nothing
can be changed by accident.

Footstep volume is Options -> Tile Sound Volume (default 70), scaled again by
the game's own SE volume setting. An older install with the sounds still at
Audio/tile_sounds keeps working; patch/audio/tile_sounds wins when both exist.

Walls already have a sound: the game plays Audio/SE/bump.ogg when you walk
into one.

The 306 surface folders the mapping never reaches were deleted - the library
went from 39 MB to 5 MB. The full 339-surface set still lives in the Legend
RPG at E:/legend_rpg_NVGT/client/assets/audio/sounds/tile_sounds if any of
them are ever wanted back.


SPEAKER NAMES
-------------
Desolation marks who is talking with a face portrait, which tells a blind
player nothing. Some lines name the speaker in the text ("SCARLETT: ..."), but
continuation lines and many short exchanges do not.

The mod now says the name when the speaker CHANGES:

  "Scarlett. Damn it, where did I put it..."

and stays quiet for their following lines, so a long speech is not interrupted
by the same name over and over. If the writers already put the name in the
line, nothing is added. Narration in between resets it, so the next character
to speak is named again.

The portrait-to-name table was not typed by hand - it was recovered by
scanning every map's dialogue for lines carrying both a portrait code and a
spoken name, then taking the name each portrait agreed on: 75 portraits, 25
characters, nearly all at 100% agreement across hundreds of lines. Thirteen
portraits never name themselves anywhere in the game; those simply get no
prefix.


PATHFINDING AND AUTO-WALK
-------------------------
Ported from the Reborn accessibility mods pra-pathfind and pra-walk
(github.com/fclorenzo/pkreborn-access), taken from the NEWER copy that lives in
E:/Guide/Reborn-19.5.0-windows/patch/Mods. Keys and behaviour are Reborn's, so
the muscle memory carries between the two games.

  O / I      cycle the event filter forwards / backwards
  H          cycle HM pathfinding: off, surf, surf and waterfall
  Shift+H    toggle sorting the event list by distance
  F5         refresh the event list
  Shift+F5   toggle auto-refreshing it when you change map (on by default)
  J / L      select the previous / next event
  Shift+J    toggle auto-walk
  Shift+L    create a point of interest
  K          say the selected event again
  Shift+K    rename the selected event
  P          pathfind to the selected event
  Shift+P    say the selected event's coordinates
  N          say the selected event's notes
  Shift+N    add a note to the selected event

The filters O and I cycle through:

  all, connections, npcs, items, merchants, signs, hidden items, notes,
  points of interest

"connections" is worth knowing about: as well as real doors, the mod now scans
all four map edges and turns every tile that leads to another map into a
selectable target named after the map it goes to. So you can select "Next Door"
and press P to walk to the border, rather than having to find the edge tile
yourself.

"notes" shows only the events you have written a note on, across every
category - a personal shortlist for the map you are standing in.

POINTS OF INTEREST

Shift+L asks for an X, a Y, a name and an optional note. Leave the coordinates
blank to use where you are standing. The point then behaves like any other
event: it appears in the list, K reads it, P walks to it, N reads its note.

Points of interest and renamed events are both saved to pra-custom-names.txt
next to the game, one per line, in the format

  map_id;map_name;x;y;name;notes;type

so you can edit the file by hand between sessions. Do not put a semicolon in a
name or a note. Naming something "ignore" hides it from the list.

ONE KEY TO WATCH

  F5   Desolation uses F5 to skip messages and cut scenes, and it is also the
       first of the three registered-item hotkeys. Refreshing the event list at
       the same time is harmless, but you will hear both. Say the word and I
       will move it - nothing else on this list collides with the game.

This newer version drops the old T and Q coordinate markers; the points of
interest above replace them, and that frees Q, which used to collide with the
game's own L button.

WHAT THE PORT CHANGED

Three things, and nothing else:

  1. tts() is redirected to this game's speech engine. Reborn provides tts()
     and Desolation does not, so defining it once meant every one of the mod's
     ~200 announcement call sites could stay byte-identical to Reborn's.
  2. The four alias lines and the CUSTOM_NAMES_FILE constant are wrapped in
     re-entry guards, because Desolation reloads Data/Mods on an F12 soft reset
     and an unguarded alias would chain onto itself and recurse.
  3. The mod restores its own settings if it finds them unset. Desolation loads
     a save by handing back a Marshal'd Game_Player (Scripts/Load.rb:679), and
     Marshal never calls initialize, so on a save made before the mod existed
     the auto-refresh and the distance sorting would have stayed off forever.

No pathfinding, key binding, filter or announcement was altered. Reborn's lava
terrain does not exist here; the original already guards that check, so it
simply never fires.

To re-port after an upstream change, run tools/port_pathfind.rb - it applies
those three edits to a fresh copy of the two Reborn files and nothing more.

ONE THING THAT DOES NOT CARRY OVER

Auto-walk suppresses wild encounters by zeroing the encounter rate variable.
Desolation only honours that variable while its FirstUse switch is set
(Scripts/Encounters.rb:128), so auto-walking through tall grass here can still
start a battle. The route survives it; you just have to finish the fight.


MODS IN patch/Mods
------------------
ALL mods live in patch\Mods now, exactly like Reborn and Rejuvenation, loaded
by the bootstrap in Data\Mods. The loader makes two passes: every
Accessibility*.rb first, alphabetically, then everything else, alphabetically -
so your own mods always load AFTER the accessibility system they might build
on, no matter what they are named. If the patch folder is missing entirely, a
warning file named ACCESSIBILITY_NOT_LOADED.txt appears in the game root
saying so, because the alternative is a game that is simply, silently, mute.

IT ISOLATES FAILURES, WHICH THE GAME'S OWN LOADER DOES NOT

Desolation's loader is unguarded: one mod that raises at load time takes the
whole game down with a crash dialog, and nothing tells you which file did it.
This one loads each file separately, so a mod that fails is skipped and named
in patch/Mods/load_log.txt while everything else still runs.

That matters more here than it sounds. Mods written for Reborn reach for
classes Desolation does not have - PokemonOptions, EnumOption,
pbAccessibilitySEPlay - so dropping one straight in and watching it fail is the
NORMAL case, not the exceptional one. It should cost you a line in a log, not
your session. Syntax errors are caught the same way.

Read patch/Mods/load_log.txt after adding anything. It is rewritten on every
start and lists what loaded, what did not, and why.


THE DIRECTIONAL BEACON
----------------------
Pick a target with J and L, then press Shift+B. A sound is placed in true 3D
toward your NEXT STEP along the walkable route, and re-steers as you walk. It
gets louder as you close in, and a chime plays when you arrive. Shift+B again
switches it off.

It follows the ACTUAL route around walls. It is not a compass pointing through
them, so following it never walks you into a corner.

  Shift+B    start or stop guiding to the selected target

This is real binaural audio, not stereo panning: beacon.dll driving Valve's
Steam Audio through phonon.dll, called from Ruby with fiddle. You get genuine
left/right, front/back and distance.

BEHIND YOU SOUNDS LOWER AND DULLER

Generic HRTF renders front and back weakly, so the wrapper adds its own rear
cue: nothing across the whole front and both sides, ramping to full only
directly behind. Behind you the pitch drops, the sound muffles, and it drops a
little in volume. PITCH_RANGE and BACK_DAMP at the top of
AccessibilityBeacon.rb control how strong that is - raise them if it is still
too subtle.

IT IS A COMPASS, NOT A HEAD - AND THAT IS DELIBERATE

The beacon is screen-fixed, exactly like Reborn's: north on the map is always
"in front", south is always "behind" - lower and duller - whichever way your
character sprite faces. Learn the mapping once and it never shifts.

A head-relative version (rotating the sound by your sprite's facing) was tried
and REMOVED at the player's request. In this game walking always turns your
sprite, so the beacon swung with every step and every turn, and a cue that
keeps moving on its own is worse than one that holds still. If you are reading
this wondering whether to "fix" the unrotated maths: it is not an oversight,
and there is a test that pins it.

  ruby tools/check_beacon_audio.rb

That walks the beacon all the way around you - front, right, behind, left - so
you can hear the south-side pitch drop.

  patch/lib/beacon.dll     the wrapper
  patch/lib/phonon.dll     Steam Audio 4.8.1
  patch/audio/beacon.wav   the beacon sound that ships with the mod

The DLLs were copied from the Reborn install and checked byte for byte.

CHANGING THE BEACON SOUND

The shipped sound is patch/audio/beacon.wav. To use your own without touching
the shipped one, drop it at Data/audio/beacon.wav (or .ogg, or .mp3) - that
location is FIRST in the search order, so it wins whenever it exists.

OGG WORKS, BUT NOT DIRECTLY - AND THIS IS WORTH UNDERSTANDING

The GAME plays .ogg perfectly well; every sound Desolation ships is .ogg. The
BEACON is a different audio path entirely. beacon.dll is built on miniaudio,
which decodes WAV and MP3 but not OGG Vorbis. Pointed at an .ogg, beacon_init
returns -4 and says so in as many words:

  could not decode beacon sound: ... (WAV or MP3 only - OGG is not supported)

That is the DLL's decoder, not a choice made here. Rebuilding it with Vorbis
support would need a C compiler, and there is not one on this machine.

So the mod converts for you. If the only beacon sound it can find is an .ogg,
it runs ffmpeg once, writes Data/audio/beacon.wav beside it, and uses that.
After the first time the .wav is found directly and it never runs again. You
can also do it yourself:

  ruby tools/set_beacon_sound.rb "some sound.ogg"
  ruby tools/set_beacon_sound.rb --restore

If ffmpeg is not available, beacon_error.txt says so plainly and the beacon
speaks directions instead of going quiet.

MONO MATTERS. A stereo file already carries its own left and right, which
fights the HRTF that is meant to be placing the sound for you. Everything is
converted to mono, 48000 Hz, 16-bit PCM - exactly what the decoder wants, so
nothing is resampled or downmixed at load.

The search order is Data/audio, patch/lib, patch/audio, Audio, then the game
folder. First hit wins.

TO CHECK IT WORKS

  ruby tools/check_beacon_audio.rb

Run that from the game folder. It loads the real engine and sweeps a beacon
from in front of you to your right. This has been run and it works - though it
uses the Ruby on your PATH, not the interpreter inside the game, so it proves
the DLLs and the paths rather than the game's own Ruby.

The game writes its own verdict to beacon_error.txt the first time you press
Shift+B. That file is the real answer, and the first thing to read if the
beacon is not behaving.

WHAT STEAM AUDIO DOES AND DOES NOT COVER HERE

Read this before planning anything else around it.

Desolation ships NO spatial audio of its own. Its Audio module takes a
"position" argument, but that is a seek offset into the track for resuming BGM,
not a place in space. Everything spatial in this game is Steam Audio, and Steam
Audio arrived with this mod.

beacon.dll renders exactly ONE source. Its whole state - one IPLBinauralEffect,
one audio device, one decoded sound, one direction, one gain - is a set of file
static globals in beacon.c. It plays one looping sound at one direction, and
that is the beacon.

So anything wanting SEVERAL sounds placed in space at once - spatialised NPCs,
positional ambience, footsteps of things around you - needs a rebuilt DLL with
a multi-source API. The C source is at
E:/Guide/Reborn-19.5.0-windows/beacon_src/beacon.c and the change is not large
(an array of effects and playheads instead of single globals), but it needs a
C compiler, and there is none on this machine right now.

THE fiddle/import PROBLEM, AND HOW IT IS SOLVED

This nearly sank the whole thing, and the game's own log is what caught it.

Running the game produced these two lines:

  startup probe | ruby 3.1.0 x64-mingw32 | fiddle: yes | files: all present
  Steam Audio load failed (LoadError: cannot load such file -- fiddle/import)

So `require 'fiddle'` works, but `require 'fiddle/import'` does not. Desolation
has fiddle compiled into x64-msvcrt-ruby310.dll and ships no stdlib tree, and
only SOME of fiddle's Ruby-level files came along with it:

  present : fiddle.so, fiddle/closure, fiddle/function, fiddle/handle,
            fiddle/memory_view
  MISSING : fiddle/import, fiddle/cparser, fiddle/struct, fiddle/value,
            fiddle/pack, fiddle/types, fiddle/version

Reborn's version of the beacon uses Fiddle::Importer, whose

  extern "void beacon_set_direction(float, float, float)"

DSL lives in the missing fiddle/import.rb. Reborn gets away with it because it
ships a full stdlib folder; Desolation does not.

But Fiddle::Importer is only a convenience wrapper. Fiddle::Handle and
Fiddle::Function are C-level and always there, along with TYPE_FLOAT, so the
mod now binds through them directly:

  Fiddle::Function.new(handle["beacon_set_direction"],
    [Fiddle::TYPE_FLOAT, Fiddle::TYPE_FLOAT, Fiddle::TYPE_FLOAT],
    Fiddle::TYPE_VOID)

That needs no .rb files at all, passes floats correctly, and works in both
games. Verified end to end: init returns 0 and the beacon sweeps from in front
of you to your right.

The startup probe now checks for Handle, Function and TYPE_FLOAT rather than
just bare fiddle, because bare fiddle was exactly the thing that said yes while
the beacon still failed.

AND THEN A SECOND ONE, FOUND THE SAME WAY

With that fixed the game logged something new:

  NoMethodError: undefined method `win32_last_error=' for Fiddle:Module

Ruby 3.1's fiddle calls BACK into Ruby after every FFI call, to record the OS
error - and Fiddle.win32_last_error= lives in the pure-Ruby fiddle.rb that
Desolation does not ship. So the DLLs, the paths and the C ABI were all fine;
fiddle simply could not finish its own bookkeeping, and the first call into
beacon_init died.

The mod now supplies those methods itself when they are missing -
win32_last_error, win32_last_socket_error and last_error, readers and writers,
copied verbatim from fiddle.rb down to the thread-local key names - and leaves
a Ruby that already has them untouched.

Worth knowing if you ever debug this again: it CANNOT be reproduced on Ruby
3.2, which does not make that callback. Only the game's own 3.1 does. The log
file is the only place this was ever visible.

Launch the game and read beacon_error.txt. "fiddle: yes" plus "Steam Audio HRTF
beacon ready" means it is working. The probe opens no DLLs and no audio device,
so it costs nothing at startup.


THE ARRIVAL CHIME

Drop arrive.ogg (or .wav, or .mp3) in Data/audio or patch/audio and it plays
when you reach the target, instead of the game's own Entering Door sound.

This one MAY be .ogg. It goes through the GAME's audio engine, which plays
Vorbis perfectly well - it is only the beacon LOOP that goes through
beacon.dll, and only that one which has to be WAV or MP3. Two different audio
paths, two different rules.


IF STEAM AUDIO CANNOT START

The beacon SPEAKS the direction instead - "left", "right", "up", "down" - only
when it changes, and on a slow timer that speeds up as you get closer. Reborn
falls back to panned footstep sounds there, but Desolation has neither those
sounds nor any way to pan, so speech is the one thing that stays useful.

That behaviour is now Options -> Spoken Directions, set to "If no 3D sound".
Set it to "Always" to hear both, or "Never" to silence it entirely.

WHAT WAS CHANGED FROM REBORN'S VERSION

Reborn puts an on/off switch in Options, Accessibility. That needs classes
Desolation does not have, and it stores the setting in the saved settings
object, which is not something worth risking a save file over. Shift+B is the
switch instead, and a beacon you are not using costs nothing.


NAMES FOR THE EVENT LIST
------------------------
Of the 8,959 events the pathfinder lists across Desolation's 479 maps, 7,083 -
79% of them - were still called EV027, EV016 and so on, because that is the
name RPG Maker generates and the writers only renamed about a fifth of their
events. Four times out of five, cycling with J and L told you nothing.

Every one of those events still knows what it IS, so the mod reads that and
works out a name:

  sprite "CustomScarlett"         Scarlett
  dialogue "GARRET: Took you..."  Garret
  a portrait code \ff[07a]        Rosetta      (via the speaker table)
  Transfer Player to map 84       Door to Celeste City
  sprite "trchar018"              Hiker        (via the game's trainer types)
  sprite "pkmn_growlithe"         Growlithe
  pbItemBall(:POTION)             Item ball: Potion
  pbPokemonMart                   Shop counter
  no sprite, but it talks         Sign: Sunshell Town Teleporter
  a sprite, silent, no name       Person
  invisible, moves you            Move trigger
  invisible, sets something       Trigger tile

Every event in the game now gets a name: 8,959 of 8,959.

A trainer with no name of their own is described by TYPE - Hiker, Beauty, Bug
Catcher, Crush Girl, Poké Maniac - because that is what Desolation's own
trainer data calls them. If they talk about exactly one Pokémon, that is added:
"Psychic, about Rattata". Two or more and it is dropped, because a list of
species is not a description.

None of this is invented. It all comes from the game's own data - the trainer
types, the species list, the map names, and the event's own commands - so it
cannot disagree with what is actually there.

IT ONLY EVER FILLS IN BLANKS

A name you set yourself with Shift+K wins. A name Desolation's writers gave the
event wins. This speaks up only when the alternative was "EV027".

WHY IT WORKS OUT THE NAME AS YOU PLAY

A generated name file has to be keyed on coordinates, and the pathfinder looks
events up by where they are NOW. About a thousand event pages in Desolation use
random movement, so in a file every wandering NPC would walk off its tile and
lose its label. Working it out on the spot follows them, and can never go stale.

THE FILE, IF YOU WANT IT ANYWAY

  ruby tools/generate_event_labels.rb            just report what it would do
  ruby tools/generate_event_labels.rb --write    write pra-custom-names.txt
  ruby tools/generate_event_labels.rb --sample 40  show more examples

This has been run, so pra-custom-names.txt already holds all 7,083 names and
you can open it in a text editor and change any of them. It is not needed for
the names to work - the mod does that on its own - it is there so the whole set
is something you can read and edit in one place.

Re-running it KEEPS every line already in the file, so your edits survive.

The generator loads the mod and calls it, rather than reimplementing the logic,
so the file can never say something different from what you hear.


THE ONE NON-ACCESSIBILITY FILE
------------------------------
AccessibilityMapFix.rb is not an accessibility feature. It keeps the prefix
only so that "delete the Accessibility*.rb files to revert everything" stays
true.

It guards one line in the base game. PokemonMapMetadata#updateMap, which
restores where NPCs were standing when you load a save, sets an event's
"through" flag OUTSIDE the check that the entry belongs to the map you are on
(Scripts/Map.rb:70). Given an entry from another map it either crashes on nil,
or silently overwrites the through flag of whatever unrelated event happens to
share that number on your current map - which makes an NPC walk through walls,
or makes one block a doorway.

BE CLEAR ABOUT WHAT THIS IS: insurance, not a repair of something breaking
today. It is NOT reachable in normal play. Every path that changes the map
fires Events.onMapChange, and that handler (Scripts/Field.rb:1818) empties the
moved-event list - walking through a door, crossing a map seam, and loading a
save all do it. So by the time updateMap runs, the list only ever holds entries
for the map you are actually standing on, and the unguarded line does the right
thing by accident.

The route that is NOT proven safe is a legacy save: DataConversion.rb:47 loads
that data straight out of an old save file, whatever shape it is in. That is
the case this covers.

The fix moves the assignment inside the check that was already there, and
changes nothing else. test_mapfix.rb runs the original and the fixed method
side by side over every input the game can produce and asserts the results are
identical, so this is not taken on trust.


TESTS
-----
The mods have a test suite that runs without launching the game:

  cd accessibility_tests
  ruby test_a11y.rb ../patch/Mods                                 119 checks
  ruby test_battle.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityBattle.rb         64 checks
  ruby test_bag.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityBag.rb               17 checks
  ruby test_quests.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityQuests.rb         19 checks
  ruby test_summary.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilitySummary.rb      125 checks
  ruby test_pathfind.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityPathfind.rb     43 checks
  ruby test_names.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityPathfindNames.rb   55 checks
  ruby test_beacon.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityBeacon.rb         71 checks
  ruby test_options.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityOptions.rb       45 checks
  ruby test_mapfix.rb ../patch/Mods/AccessibilityMapFix.rb         21 checks
  ruby test_patchloader.rb ../Data/Mods/AccessibilityLoader.rb     21 checks
  ruby test_load_order.rb ..                                       17 checks

test_a11y covers menus, options, the party and storage screens, event
selectors, tile sounds, the zone readout and speaker names.

test_pathfind has its own harness because the pathfinder needs a much richer
environment than the other mods - a map factory, terrain tags, real event
command lists - and it drives the whole feature: the map scan, the connection
edges, creating a point of interest and reading it back off disk, the HM
toggle and a step of auto-walk.

test_mapfix runs the original base-game method and the guarded one side by side
over the same inputs, so the claim that nothing else changed is checked rather
than asserted.

test_names checks the label derived for each kind of event, and - just as
important - that it stays quiet where a name already exists.

test_beacon runs the beacon from accessibility_tests, where it cannot reach the
real DLLs, so it exercises the guidance logic and the spoken fallback without
loading a 53 MB audio engine or making noise.

test_load_order boots the stack the way the GAME does - Data/Mods first, which is just the bootstrap, then patch/Mods through it - all, which is
alphabetical. That order puts Speech LAST, and a mod that touches
AccessibilitySpeech at load time crashes the game on startup. That has already
happened once for real, and none of the other harnesses can see it, because
they each load one mod at a time.

Run all twelve after any edit.
